Database Fundamentals - Introduction to Core Database Concepts

	A relational database is a collection of tables of data that are formally
	described and organized accrding to the relation model.

	Primary Key:
		identify uniquely every row. Cannot be null or duplicate.
	Foreign Key:
		create relationship between two tables. Can be null or duplicate.
	Note: a foreign key can become a primary key depending on the table.
		
	Primary key - A column (or set of columns) whose values uniquely identify every row in a table.
		No two rows can have the same primary key value.
		Every row must have a primary key value. (Primary key columns may not allow NULL values.)
		Values in primary key columns should never be modified or updated.
		Primary key values should never be reused. (If a row is deleted from the table, its primary key may not be assigned to any new rows in the future.)
	
	DBMS (Data Base Management System):
		Stores and retrieves information as files
	RDBMS (Relational DBMS):
		Stores and retrieves information in a tabular form (Primary Key)
	http://www.javatpoint.com/difference-between-dbms-and-rdbms
	
	
	Normalization (strategy to clean the data and reduce data redundancy):
		1. Eliminate Repeating Groups
			Do not use multiple field. 
		2. Eliminate Redundant Data
			If some data is redundant, create a new table so that it only
			depends on the Primary Key
		3. Eliminate Columnns Not Dependent on Key
			If some data depends on another key, split the table into two
		4. Isolate Independent Multiple Relationships (optional)
			BCNF - no overlapping candidate keys
		5. Isolate Semantically Related Multiple Relationships (optional)
		
	Example:
		Unnormalized data -> 
		Abstract into redundancy -> 
		Split to remove redundancy ->
		Split table so that data always depends on the primary key
	
	
	Referential Integrity (RI):
		Concept used to synchronize database tables during data modification.
		Methods to maintain RI:
			Primary key constraint
			Foreign key constraint
			Unique constraint
			Indexes
			Triggers
		A composite key is an index or constraint using more than one column.
		To preserve unicity, it may be necessary to create a unique value like an ID.
	
		Common kinds of constraints are:
			not null: each value in a column must not be NULL
			unique: value(s) in specified column(s) must be unique for each row in a table
			primary key: value(s) in specified column(s) must be unique for each row in a table and not be NULL; normally each table in a database should have a primary key - it is used to identify individual records
			foreign key: value(s) in specified column(s) must reference an existing record in another table (via it's primary key or some other unique constraint)
			check: an expression is specified, which must evaluate to true for constraint to be satisfied


	Data types:
		A type of allowed data. Every table column has an associated datatype that restricts (or allows) specific data in that column.
		Money: currency values (8 bits)
		Int: integer data (4 bytes)
		Float: approximate number (depends)
		Datetime: date range (8 bytes)
		Char: fixed length non-unicode string data (n bytes)
		Varchar: variable length non-unicode string (length + 2 bytes)
		Bit: integer 0 or 1 (1 byte for every 8 but columns)
		http://www.w3schools.com/sqL/sql_datatypes_general.asp
		
		Switch between data types using CAST (standard) or CONVERT (more complex)
	
	
	Data objects:
		Stored Procedures: 
			Set of precompiled SQL statements to perform a special task
		User-Defined Functions (udf):
			Routines that takes zero or more parameters and return a value
			Three types: scalar, table-valued, system (SQL default)
		Functions are computed values and cannot perform permanent environmental changes to SQL Server (i.e. no INSERT or UPDATE statements allowed).

		
	DDL is Data Definition Language 
	Used to define data structures (e.g. create table, alter table, ...)
		1. CREATE - to create objects in the database
		2. ALTER - alters the structure of the database 
		3. DROP - delete objects from the database
		4. TRUNCATE - remove all records from a table, including all spaces allocated for the records are removed
		5. COMMENT - add comments to the data dictionary
		6. RENAME - rename an object
		
		
	DML is Data Manipulation Language
	Used to manipulate data itself (e.g. insert, update, delete, ... )
		1. SELECT - retrieve data from the a database 
		SELECT * FROM tablename
		2. INSERT - insert data into a table UPDATE - updates existing data within a table
		INSERT INTO P.Unit 
		VALUES(N'FT', N'Feet', '20080414',
			   N'FT2', N'Feet Square', '20080413')
		3. DELETE - deletes all records from a table, the space for the records remain
		4. MERGE - UPSERT operation (insert or update)
		5. CALL - call a PL/SQL or Java subprogram    
		6. EXPLAIN PLAN - explain access path to data 
		7. LOCK TABLE - control concurrency
		
		
	
	Database security:
		Securables are the server, database and objects of the database
		Principals are the individuals, groups and processes granted access to SQL Server
		Permissions are granted to a principal for every securable
	
	Accessing content:
		1. Login / Authentification (access to SQL Server)
		2. Database user (Database access)
		3. Permissions (Object access)
		
	Fixed server roles:
		Sysadmin (perform any activity)
		Dbcreator (create, alter, drop, restore databases)
		Securityadmin (manage logins and their properties)
	Fixed database roles:
		db_owner (perform all configuration activities)
		db_datareader (read data from all user tables)
		db_datawriter (add, delete, change data)
	You can also create user-defined roles.
	
	Guest accounts are enabled by default.
	
	Object permissions:
		Grant (provides a level of access to the object)
		Deny (overrides any grant permission)
		Revoke (removes the previous permission, whether grant or deny)
		
	Database backups:
		Full backup
		Differential backup (bigger but fewer backup)
		Incremental backup (smaller but more numerous backup)
		
	SQL Hosting
	Popular for database-driven web sites with high traffic
		MS SQL Server, Oracle
		MySQL (less expensive)
		Access (simplest database)
